[serve][llm][doc] Document direct streaming and ingress request router (#63860)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/llm/user-guides/direct-streaming.md

Replica selection is delegated to the `LLMServer` deployment's configured request router through `choose_replica()`, so the same routing policies used elsewhere in Ray Serve apply here. When you don't configure a router, direct streaming defaults to `RoundRobinRouter`.

The router picks a replica without reserving a capacity slot. The real request travels out-of-band through HAProxy, so Serve's capacity semaphore isn't load-bearing on this path, and skipping the reservation avoids an extra actor RPC per request.

## Enable direct streaming

Direct streaming runs on top of the HAProxy ingress. Set both environment variables before starting Serve:

```bash
export RAY_SERVE_ENABLE_HA_PROXY=1
export RAY_SERVE_LLM_ENABLE_DIRECT_STREAMING=1
```

Then build and deploy a single-model application as usual:

```python
from ray import serve
from ray.serve.llm import LLMConfig, build_openai_app

llm_config = LLMConfig(
    model_loading_config={"model_id": "qwen-0.5b"},
    deployment_config={"autoscaling_config": {"min_replicas": 1, "max_replicas": 4}},
)

> app = build_openai_app({"llm_configs": [llm_config]})

Author: False positive. `build_openai_app(llm_serving_args: dict)` takes a single positional dict (see `python/ray/serve/llm/__init__.py`), and the existing examples/tutorials call it as `build_openai_app({"llm_configs": [...]})` (quick-start.md, serve-deepseek.md, cross_node_parallelism_example.py). The suggested `build_openai_app(llm_configs=[...])` would raise `TypeError`. This snippet is now a tested doc_code example, so the call signature is verified in CI.

(direct-streaming-guide)=
# Direct streaming

> Lower streaming latency by removing the ingress proxy hop and routing requests directly to model replicas.

Reviewer: Can you add a figure to make it intuitive what is happening?

Author: Done

:::{warning}
This feature is in alpha and may change before becoming stable. It depends on the HAProxy ingress and supports a single model per application.

The ingress request router is an internal component. Its router deployment, the `/internal/route` endpoint, and the replica-selection plumbing are private implementation details that may change without notice. Configure direct streaming only through the environment variables and the public `request_router_config` described in this guide. Don't import or call those internals directly.
:::

> By default, every request to a Ray Serve LLM application flows through a separate ingress deployment (`OpenAiIngress`) before reaching an `LLMServer` replica. The ingress replica proxies both the request and the streamed response, so each token in a streaming response crosses one extra deployment boundary.

Reviewer: also mention that the event loop of the ingress deployment (OpenAIIngress) will be shared between the forward path of requests (TTFT) and the return path of streamed tokens (TPOT)

Author: Done

**Direct streaming** removes that hop. When enabled, the `LLMServer` deployment itself becomes the HTTP ingress, and HAProxy forwards client traffic straight to the replica that serves it. An **ingress request router** decides which replica each request goes to.

## When to use direct streaming

Direct streaming is the low-latency path for Ray Serve LLM. Removing the ingress proxy hop cuts per-token overhead on streaming responses, which matters most for long generations and latency-sensitive, high-throughput deployments. It's alpha and is intended to become the default serving path as it matures.

> For now, use it for single-model deployments where streaming latency is a priority, and keep the default ingress for everything else (see {ref}`direct-streaming-limitations`).

Reviewer: This statement is not fully correct, right? You can serve multiple models in separate apps, no?

Author: Right. Removed the sentence; multi-model via separate apps is covered in Limitations.

```
Client → HAProxy → OpenAiIngress replica → LLMServer replica → engine
```

With direct streaming, the `LLMServer` deployment is the ingress. HAProxy first asks the ingress request router which replica to use, then forwards the request directly to that replica's backend HTTP port:

```
                  ┌─ (1) which replica? ──→ ingress request router (internal)
                  │                             │ applies request_router_config
Client → HAProxy ─┤                             ↓
                  │                          host:port of an LLMServer replica
                  └─ (2) forward request ──→ LLMServer replica → engine
```

The `LLMServer` replica builds its ASGI app from the engine's native OpenAI-compatible FastAPI app, such as vLLM's API server, after the engine starts. Streaming responses are then served directly from the engine frontend.

### Ingress request router

Ray Serve adds an internal router deployment that answers HAProxy's routing calls. For each request, HAProxy asks the router which replica to use over an internal endpoint, and the router returns that replica's backend host and port.

> Replica selection reuses the `LLMServer` deployment's configured request router, so the same routing policies you would use for any deployment apply here. When you don't configure one, direct streaming defaults to `RoundRobinRouter`. This differs from Serve's general default of Power of Two Choices. You control it through the public `request_router_config`, described in {ref}`direct-streaming-customize`. The router deployment and its endpoint are internal and may change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replica selection reuses the `LLMServer` deployment's configured request router, so the same routing policies you would use for any deployment apply here. When you do not configure one, direct streaming defaults to `RoundRobinRouter`. This differs from Serve's general default of Power of Two Choices. You control it through the public `request_router_config`, described in {ref}`direct-streaming-customize`. The router deployment and its endpoint are internal and may change.
```

Author: Done

> The router picks a replica without reserving a capacity slot. The real request travels out-of-band through HAProxy, so Serve's capacity semaphore isn't load-bearing on this path, and skipping the reservation avoids an extra actor RPC per request.

Reviewer: This is an implementation detail I feel like. Very hard for end user to relate to.

Author: Done

> The router picks a replica without reserving a capacity slot. The real request travels out-of-band through HAProxy, so Serve's capacity semaphore isn't load-bearing on this path, and skipping the reservation avoids an extra actor RPC per request.

Reviewer 2: consider to remove "Serve's capacity semaphore" as this is an internal implementation detail that most readers are unaware of.

Author: Done

## Supported serving patterns

Direct streaming works with the single-model builders for the OpenAI, data parallel attention, and prefill/decode patterns:

- **OpenAI** (`build_openai_app`): the `LLMServer` deployment serves the engine app directly.
- **Data parallel attention** (`build_dp_openai_app`): the `DPServer` deployment serves the engine app directly. See {doc}`data-parallel-attention`.
- **Prefill/decode disaggregation** (`build_pd_openai_app`): the decode server serves the engine app directly, while `/v1/chat/completions` and `/v1/completions` route through prefill/decode orchestration (remote prefill, then local decode). Other routes stay engine-native. See {doc}`prefill-decode`.

> ## Enable direct streaming

Reviewer: This should be moved to very top. It's burried down here after a lot of details end user might not need to know about.

Reviewer 2: +1, especially the env variables

Author: Done

Direct streaming runs on top of the HAProxy ingress. Set both environment variables before starting Serve:

```bash
export RAY_SERVE_ENABLE_HA_PROXY=1
export RAY_SERVE_LLM_ENABLE_DIRECT_STREAMING=1
```

Then build and deploy a single-model application:

::::{tab-set}
:::{tab-item} Python
```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/direct_streaming/direct_streaming_example.py
:start-after: __direct_streaming_example_start__
:end-before: __direct_streaming_example_end__
:language: python
```
:::

:::{tab-item} YAML
```{literalinclude} ../../../llm/doc_code/serve/direct_streaming/direct_streaming_config.yaml
:language: yaml
```

Run `serve run` from a shell where both environment variables are still exported, so the controller enables HAProxy and direct streaming when it builds the application:

```bash
serve run config.yaml
```
:::
::::

The deployed application is OpenAI-compatible and exposes the engine's native routes, including `/v1/chat/completions`, `/v1/completions`, and `/v1/models`. Ray Serve LLM also adds `GET /v1/models/{id}`, so clients can call `client.models.retrieve(...)` as they would against the standalone ingress.

> To confirm direct streaming is active, open the Serve dashboard and check that the ingress request router deployment (listed as `LLMRouter`) is running alongside your model deployment.

Reviewer: Take a screenshot?

Reviewer: What would be the ray list command equivalent here? or serve status equivalent so that it is agent friendly?

Author: Done

The header name defaults to `x-session-id` and is configurable with `RAY_SERVE_SESSION_ID_HEADER_KEY`. Header matching ignores case and treats `-` and `_` as equivalent, so `X-Session-Id`, `x-session-id`, and `x_session_id` all match the same configured name. This matters because some reverse proxies, such as nginx and AWS API Gateway, rewrite `-` to `_` in header names. Without this tolerance, such a rewrite would silently drop session affinity.

(direct-streaming-limitations)=
## Limitations

- **Single model per application.** `build_openai_app` raises if you pass more than one `LLMConfig` while direct streaming is enabled. To serve multiple models, deploy each as its own single-model direct streaming application on a distinct route prefix. Clients then target the per-model endpoint directly instead of selecting the model by the `model` field on one shared endpoint.

> - **No LoRA- or multiplex-aware routing.** The ingress request router doesn't forward the requested model or adapter id to the routing policy, so requests aren't steered to replicas that already have a given LoRA adapter loaded. The default `RoundRobinRouter` is multiplex-unaware. A single base model with adapters still serves, but without adapter affinity. If you need adapter-affinity routing, use the default ingress instead, which routes multiplex-aware. See [Multi-LoRA deployment](multi-lora.md).

Reviewer: Wouldn't just passing the Pow2 router work here?

Author: Needs a code change in `LLMServer` as well. Following up in ray-project/ray#63934.
